Every website can be split up into two
parts: the frontend and the backend.
The frontend is all the visual stuff
you see on the web page: the images, the
text, the buttons, and the backend is
what saves and manages your data, for
example your amazon order history. In
this video I'm going to explain all the
technologies that are used in the front
end of a web application, and in another
video we'll explore the backend let's
get started.
We're going to start with a blank web
page and the first technology we're
going to look at is html. html stands for
hyper text markup language and is used
to add content to our web page. For
example, I can write this bit of html to
add a button.
I can also add other types of content,
like images, and text and if I write more
html, it will add more content to my page.
But you'll notice that our page doesn't
look very good. That's where css comes in.
css stands for cascading style sheets,
and based on the name, it's used to style
our web page, so it's used to make our
web page look good, by letting us adjust
colors, sizes, spacing, things like that.
Let's add some css to our page.
So now that looks much better, but we're
not done here.
Let's say that I want to filter these
products, and only show one brand of
shoes, so I click this checkbox.
But you'll notice that nothing happens
and this is where javascript comes in.
html and css only display things on our
web page, but javascript is what makes
our web page interactive.
So for example, when we click something,
and type something, a bit of javascript
code will update the page based on what
we did.
The most important feature of javascript
is something called the document object
model, or the dom.
The dom allows javascript to change the
web page.
For example, this bit of javascript code
uses the dom to change the text in the
button.
And this is how javascript makes pages
interactive.
However, using the dom directly like this
is really repetitive, and hard to manage
and that's why we use a javascript
framework.
Javascript frameworks give us a much
nicer way to create our web page, and
they take care of updating the page for
us, so we never use the dom directly
anymore.
The most popular ones are react.js,
angular, and vue.js.
Now let's take a step back, and look at
javascript again.
Javascript as a language is missing a
lot of features that other programming
languages have.
One of these features is being able to
split up our code into different files,
and to organize our code.
To solve this we have to use something
called a bundler. The most popular one
you've probably heard of is called
webpack.
Webpack lets us split up our javascript
code into many different files, and once
we're ready to put it on our website,
webpack will combine all of these files,
or bundle all of these files into one
javascript file that we can put on our
website.
Another tool that we use is called a
transpiler. The most popular one you
probably heard of is called typescript.
A transpiler adds extra features onto
javascript. It lets us write an enhanced
version of javascript, and then once
we're done it will transform the
enhanced javascript back into normal
javascript because browsers like google
chrome can only understand normal
javascript.
So those are the major technologies in
the javascript world.
Now we're going to move over to css.
css as a language has the same problems
as javascript. We can't organize our code
into different files, and css is missing
a lot of useful features, so we also use
a bundler and a transpiler for css.
There's a special name for this called a
css preprocessor. It's basically the
combination of a bundler and a
transpiler. The most popular css
preprocessor you probably heard of is
called sass.
sass lets us organize our css into
different files, and it lets us write
enhanced css,
and then it will bundle all those files
together into one file, and it will
transform the enhanced css back into
normal css. So you can think of it sort
of like a bundler and a transpiler
combined. Now, once we had css
preprocessors, developers start to create
css frameworks, the most popular one
being bootstrap.
css frameworks are basically a whole
bunch of css code that someone else
wrote, and it helps us solve common
problems, so using a framework like
bootstrap saves us a lot of time.
The last thing we're going to look at is
how does the frontend communicate with
the backend?
For example let's say I'm on amazon and
I want to make an order. How does this
order get sent from my computer to
amazon?
Javascript has a feature for this too
called XMLHttpRequest. It lets us send
a message, in this case we're going to
send our amazon order, to a url like
amazon.com/
create-order. On the other side, amazon's
backend is listening for these messages
sent to this url and that's how they get
our order. We're going to talk more about
this process in our backend video that
you can find in the description.
Over the years we've improved on
XMLHttpRequest and these days we use tools
like axios or fetch to send messages to
the backend.
Alright, so these are all the
technologies we need to build the frontend.
You'll notice that it's really just
html, css, and javascript. The other
technologies make css and javascript
easier to work with. Let me know in the
comments how many of these technologies
you already knew, and if anything was new
to you. Thanks for watching, my name is
simon from supersimple.dev I want to
make a tech career possible for anyone.
You can find my contact info in the
description, and I'll see you in the next
one.